---
layout: page
title : The Cheeseburger Conundrum
category : psychology
tagline : "A first post"
tags : [psychology, behavioral economics, jdm, Cincinnati, essays]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

[One thing I unintentionally find myself valuing in a city is quality eavesdropping](http://paulgraham.com/cities.html)&#8212;I don't think I'm alone in this.
I recall walking around Boston (Cambridge, specifically), overhearing interesting conversations 
about the existence of God between Harvard undergrads or discussions of the early stages of the Affordable Care Act.

There is quality eavesdropping almost everywhere, Cincinnati included.
It depends what topic you want to overhear. I hang out in coffeeshops
like many MacBook owners with beards and glasses in their early 20s,
mostly to get work done and to welcome the occasional interruption, which,
when I work at home, I miss. To catch serendipity you set your snare where stuff happens.

A nursing student behind me is conversing about her theories on why people smoke, 
when cigarettes are the only legal product available that kill you when used 
properly.

"Every doctor's visit, you're fine," she says. "Until one day, you're not."

She continues to talk about heart disease and stroke, two other preventable
diseases that she sees commonly. If people monitored their diets and exercised regularly,
this might not be an issue.

This reminds me of one of the classic concepts from behavioral economics&#8212;temporal discounting.
The human mind is tremendously capable of dealing with the immediate, but the 
more imagination required for a future event, the harder time we have planning for 
it. 

I call this the Cheeseburger Conundrum. A cheeseburger will not cause a heart
attack. Two cheeseburgers will not either. However, a cheeseburger a day for
forty years will magnify one's risk. Cheeseburgers per unit time is the worry.

The Cheeseburger Conundrum bedevils every facet of decision-making where time is involved. 
Health debt is one such place, but so is financial debt. No one wakes up in the 
morning wishing to end up with credit card debt, but the [average amount of credit card
debt per household in the US is $7,117](http://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/credit-card-data/average-credit-card-debt-household/).
We could extend this to academics, where nobody plans to fail out of college,
but some fraction of individuals do. People often mire themselves in realities
they do not want because we ignore these threats, which sneak below the threshold
of alarm.

> "Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them."
> - Alfred Whitehead North

I have no good solution to this time bomb issue&#8212;I run often and would like to think
that I'm healthy, but I'm procrastinating on a presentation I have tomorrow to plunk out
this blog post rather than review my deck. I'm guilty of trading later and now, to some degree.

The solution, perhaps, is to set up easy defaults for making the right decision.
This is likely what Michael Bloomberg was trying to do with his infamous New York soda size ban,
or why people spend such an absurd amount of money annually on 100-calorie packs when they could by
a full-sized pack and ration out the portions&#8212;we realize that when facing certain choices we 
choose wrongly more frequently than we would like, and we re-allocate our resources to re-structure 
the environment around the stimulus. Maybe cutting up a credit card is the first step to reducing
credit card debt, rather than resisting maxing out that card.
