---
layout: page
title : d3 Faculty Salary Visualization
category : Visualization
tagline : "The pay grades for grade-giving"
tags : [ d3, education, visualization, data, academia]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

About two years ago I was giving a copy of Miami University's faculty salary data. At
the time, I was looking to do a research study on the difference in pay between PhDs in
industry and those in academia.

Originally, I was curious if my 2013 graduating year was actually one of the best to return
to school and get a PhD. Given the current value of STEM PhDs, it seemed that eventually
individuals may start regularly paying to advanced degrees and assistantships would dwindle.

It's a safe assumption that we pay academics based on their opportunity cost in industry:
A PhD in statistics could easily command a six-figure salary, and to attract one to stay
in the ivory tower, it helps to incentivize him or her with more pay than one would give
an English professor, whose skills are generally less marketable in the current economy.
This is not to say that an articulate, charismatic, business-savvy humanities professor
would fail as a CEO&#8212;it's simply that the market price for a statistician or a 
biologist far outpaces those for a musician or a French poetry major, given the 
demand in industry for [CS-STEM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/STEM_fields) skills
and the relatively short supply of them.

The data bears out this opportunity cost assumption. [I've put together a d3 visualization
where you can watch the rapid ascent of pay for STEM and business professors.](http://www.andrewduberstein.com/academic_salaries_visualization/)
