---
layout: page
title : How To Get a Job Like Mine
category : work
tagline: "The odyssey from analytics to engineering"
image: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5e/Kurt_Vonnegut_1972.jpg
tags : [ engineer ]
---

{% include JB/setup %}

I once read that Kurt Vonnegut would title his public lectures **How to Get a Job Like Mine**.
He would then proceed to talk about whatever interested him that day.
The title is a clever tactic&#8212;terse and eye-catching to the audience while unrestrictive to the author.

I have come to appreciate concise genius more since moving to software. I am inspired by coworkers who seem to be factories of it:
A change in code that decimates lines like a perfectly aligned Tetris piece,
a Bash phrase that restructures a Russian novel's worth of text, the parsimonious power in a few Vim keystrokes.
Software has made me hyperconscious of the joy in efficiency.

Maybe it is this joy, press, or pay that attracts people to code. Whatever the cause, there is a surge in the number of 
non-engineering acquaintances asking me some variations of these three questions:

- "Do you guys get Uber credits?"
- "Are you liking engineering?"
- "You have a bachelor's in economics and are doing this&#8212;can I become a software engineer, too?"

I have offered variations of this post as a response. The answers, respectively:

- Most definitely.
- Most definitely!
- See below.

### General guidance on becoming an engineer

**Recognize that programming != software engineering != computer science**. The three are indeed disparate. You can solve [FizzBuzz](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?FizzBuzzTest)
without being an accomplished engineer or CS major. You can design a link shortener without remembering how to implement quicksort. You can write quicksort without writing any actual code. 
Indeed, you may actually enjoy programming and computer science but discover that you loathe engineering. Perhaps you prefer that analysts do not test code, use Git, or gray their hair over uptime.
This also means that much of what you will do is new to you. Prospective engineers should be prepared to drink deep from an informational fire hose. Version control, testing, 
monitoring, logging, working with a team, the use of profanity while scruitinizing the undocumented and untested code of a long-terminated soul&#8212;all will be new to you.

**You likely already qualify.** Schools do not teach practical skills like how to port-forward from a server, manage a sprawling code base, or interpret some legacy system's gnarly, ancient PHP. 
If anything, this is liberating&#8212;many necessary skills, you cannot (and your peers did not) attain through formal education. You can learn software skills with Google and time. 
Additionally, your current knowledge is repurposable. For analysts, a quantitative background means a better understanding of A/B testing and machine learning.

**You will benefit from the support of your employer.** This requires luck and initiative on your part. I was fortunate to have a supportive manager and company ([We're hiring!](https://www.uber.com/jobs)).
If your employer does not approve, there are still options. Seeking the analyst-to-engineer metamorphosis, a friend approached his manager but was promptly denied.
Tenacious, he interviewed elsewhere. He came back to his current employer with two job offers in hand. 
He now blogs about the wonders of engineering and serves as beacon of hope, evidence that bargaining is much easier with leverage.

### Concrete recommendations

- To start or improve as a programmer, solve [Project Euler](https://projecteuler.net/) problems. Do the first fifty. Do [Project Rosalind](http://rosalind.info/) problems. [Follow tutorials](http://pyvideo.org/). Prefer venues that offer feedback on your performance.
- To start or improve as an engineer, dream up ideas&#8212;even ones without marketable value&#8212;and implement them. Build minesweeper, bit.ly, your own blogging platform&#8212;simply start making.
- Go through [books with interview questions](http://www.amazon.com/Cracking-Coding-Interview-Programming-Questions/dp/098478280X). Even if you are making the change internally at a supportive employer, a mastery of college-sophomore level algorithms is indispensable and may come up in future interviews.

In trademark bittersweet wit, Vonnegut offers us this gem: "If you can do a half-assed job of anything, you are a one-eyed man in the kingdom of the blind."
I see this quote as inspirational: If you want to be an engineer, the act of trying pushes you far ahead on the path to being one. Vonnegut and I encourage you to make the leap.
